# Exercise 2.1

Define a better version of make-rat that handles both positive and negative arguments. make-rat should normalize the sign so that if the rational number is positive, both the numerator and denominator are positive, and if the rational number is negative, only the numerator is negative.

# Answer 2.1

[Scripts/make_rat.py](Scripts/make_rat.py)

# Exercise 2.2

Consider the problem of representing line segments in a plane. Each segment is represented as a pair of points: a starting point and an ending point. Define a constructor make-segment and selectors start-segment and end-segment that define the representation of segments in terms of points. Furthermore, a point can be represented as a pair of numbers: the x coordinate and the y coordinate. Accordingly, specify a constructor make-point and selectors x-point and y-point that define this representation. Finally, using your selectors and constructors, define a procedure midpoint-segment that takes a line segment as argument and returns its midpoint (the point whose coordinates are the average of the coordinates of the endpoints). To try your procedures, you’ll need a way to print points:

```scheme
(define (print-point p)
    (newline)
    (display "(")
    (display (x-point p))
    (display ",")
    (display (y-point p))
    (display ")"))
```

# Answer 2.2

[Scripts/line_segments.py](Scripts/line_segments.py)

# Exercise 2.3

Implement a representation for rectangles in a plane. (Hint: You may want to make use of Exercise 2.2.) In terms of your constructors and selectors, create procedures that compute the perimeter and the area of a given rectangle. Now implement a different representation for rectangles. Can you design your system with suitable abstraction barriers, so that the same perimeter and area procedures will work using either representation?


# Exercise 2.4

Here is an alternative procedural representation of pairs. For this representation, verify that (car (cons x y)) yields x for any objects x and y.

```scheme
(define (cons x y)
    (lambda (m) (m x y)))
(define (car z)
    (z (lambda (p q) p)))
```

What is the corresponding definition of cdr? (Hint: To verify that this works, make use of the substitution model of Section 1.1.5.)

# Answer 2.4

```python
def cons(x, y):
    return lambda m : m(x, y)
def cdr(z):
    return z(lambda p, q : q)
```

# Exercise 2.5

Show that we can represent pairs of nonnegative integers using only numbers and arithmetic operations if we represent the pair a and b as the integer that is the product $2^a3^b$. Give the corresponding definitions of the procedures cons, car, and cdr.

# Answer 2.5

```python
def cons(a, b):
    return pow(2, a) * pow(3, b)

def car(z):
    a = 0
    while z % 2 == 0:
        z /= 2
        a += 1
    return a

def cdr(z):
    b = 0
    while z % 3 == 0:
        z /= 3
        b += 1
    return b
```

# Exercise 2.6

In case representing pairs as procedures wasn’t mind-boggling enough, consider that, in a language that can manipulate procedures, we can get by without numbers (at least insofar as nonnegative integers are concerned) by implementing 0 and the operation of adding 1 as

```scheme
(define zero (lambda (f) (lambda (x) x)))
(define (add-1 n)
    (lambda (f) (lambda (x) (f ((n f) x)))))
```

This representation is known as Church numerals, after its inventor, Alonzo Church, the logician who invented the λ-calculus.

Define one and two directly (not in terms of zero and add-1). (Hint: Use substitution to evaluate (add-1 zero)). Give a direct definition of the addition procedure + (not in terms of repeated application of add-1).


# Exercise 2.7

Alyssa’s program is incomplete because she has not specified the implementation of the interval abstraction. Here is a definition of the interval constructor:

```scheme
(define (make-interval a b) (cons a b))
```

Define selectors upper-bound and lower-bound to complete the implementation.

# Answer 2.7

[Scripts/interval_bounds.py](Scripts/interval_bounds.py)

# Exercise 2.8

Using reasoning analogous to Alyssa’s, describe how the difference of two intervals may be computed. Define a corresponding subtraction procedure, called sub-interval.

# Answer 2.8

[Scripts/interval_sub.py](Scripts/interval_sub.py)


# Exercise 2.9

The width of an interval is half of the difference between its upper and lower bounds. The width is a measure of the uncertainty of the number specified by the interval. For some arithmetic operations the width of the result of combining two intervals is a function only of the widths of the argument intervals, whereas for others the width of the combination is not a function of the widths of the argument intervals. Show that the width of the sum (or difference) of two intervals is a function only of the widths of the intervals being added (or subtracted). Give examples to show that this is not true for multiplication or division.

# Answer 2.9

[Scripts/interval_width.py](Scripts/interval_width.py)

# Exercise 2.10

Ben Bitdiddle, an expert systems programmer, looks over Alyssa’s shoulder and comments that it is not clear what it means to divide by an interval that spans zero. Modify Alyssa’s code to check for this condition and to signal an error if it occurs.

# Answer 2.10

[Scripts/interval_divide_fix.py](Scripts/interval_divide_fix.py)

# Exercise 2.11

In passing, Ben also cryptically comments: “By testing the signs of the endpoints of the intervals, it is possible to break mul-interval into nine cases, only one of which requires more than two multiplications.” Rewrite this procedure using Ben’s suggestion.

After debugging her program, Alyssa shows it to a potential user, who complains that her program solves the wrong problem. He wants a program that can deal with numbers represented as a center value and an additive tolerance; for example, he wants to work with intervals such as 3.5 ± 0.15 rather than [3.35, 3.65]. Alyssa returns to her desk and fixes this problem by supplying an alternate constructor and alternate selectors:

```scheme
(define (make-center-width c w)
    (make-interval (- c w) (+ c w)))
(define (center i)
    (/ (+ (lower-bound i) (upper-bound i)) 2))
(define (width i)
    (/ (- (upper-bound i) (lower-bound i)) 2))
```

Unfortunately, most of Alyssa’s users are engineers. Real engineering situations usually involve measurements with only a small uncertainty, measured as the ratio of the width of the interval to the midpoint of the interval. Engineers usually specify percentage tolerances on the parameters of devices, as in the resistor specifications given earlier.

# Exercise 2.12

Define a constructor make-center-percent that takes a center and a percentage tolerance and produces the desired interval. You must also define a selector percent that produces the percentage tolerance for a given interval. The center selector is the same as the one shown above.

# Answer 2.12

[Scripts/make_center_percent.py](Scripts/make_center_percent.py)


# Exercise 2.13

Show that under the assumption of small percentage tolerances there is a simple formula for the approximate percentage tolerance of the product of two intervals in terms of the tolerances of the factors. You may simplify the problem by assuming that all numbers are positive.

After considerable work, Alyssa P. Hacker delivers her finished system. Several years later, after she has forgotten all about it, she gets a frenzied call from an irate user, Lem E. Tweakit. It seems that Lem has noticed that the formula for parallel resistors can be written in two algebraically equivalent ways:

$$\frac{R_1R_2}{R_1 + R_2}$$

and 

$$\frac{1}{1 / R_1 + 1 / R_2}$$

He has written the following two programs, each of which computes the parallel-resistors formula differently:

```scheme
(define (par1 r1 r2)
    (div-interval (mul-interval r1 r2)
                (add-interval r1 r2)))

(define (par2 r1 r2)
    (let ((one (make-interval 1 1)))
        (div-interval
            one (add-interval (div-interval one r1)
            (div-interval one r2)))))
```


Lem complains that Alyssa’s program gives different answers for the two ways of computing. This is a serious complaint.


# Exercise 2.14

Demonstrate that Lem is right. Investigate the behavior of the system on a variety of arithmetic expressions. Make some intervals A and B, and use them in computing the expressions A/A and A/B. You will get the most insight by using intervals whose width is a small percentage of the center value. Examine the results of the computation in center-percent form (see Exercise 2.12).

# Answer 2.14

[Scripts/interval_parallel_formula.py](Scripts/interval_parallel_formula.py)

# Exercise 2.15

Eva Lu Ator, another user, has also noticed the different intervals computed by different but algebraically equivalent expressions. She says that a formula to compute with intervals using Alyssa’s system will produce tighter error bounds if it can be written in such a form that no variable that represents an uncertain number is repeated. Thus, she says, par2 is a “better” program for parallel resistances than par1. Is she right? Why?

# Exercise 2.16

Explain, in general, why equivalent algebraic expressions may lead to different answers. Can you devise an interval-arithmetic package that does not have this shortcoming, or is this task impossible? (Warning: This problem is very diffcult.)


# Exercise 2.17

Define a procedure last-pair that returns the list that contains only the last element of a given (nonempty) list:

```scheme
(last-pair (list 23 72 149 34))
(34)
```

# Answer 2.17

[Scripts/last_pair.py](Scripts/last_pair.py)

# Exercise 2.18

Define a procedure reverse that takes a list as argument and returns a list of the same elements in reverse order:

```scheme
(reverse (list 1 4 9 16 25))
(25 16 9 4 1)
```

# Answer 2.18

[Scripts/reverse.py](Scripts/reverse.py)

# Exercise 2.19

Consider the change-counting program of Section 1.2.2. It would be nice to be able to easily change the currency used by the program, so that we could compute the number of ways to change a British pound, for example. As the program is written, the knowledge of the currency is distributed partly into the procedure first-denomination and partly into the procedure count-change (which knows that there are five kinds of U.S. coins). It would be nicer to be able to supply a list of coins to be used for making change.

We want to rewrite the procedure cc so that its second argument is a list of the values of the coins to use rather than an integer specifying which coins to use. We could then have lists that defined each kind of currency:

```scheme
(define us-coins (list 50 25 10 5 1))
(define uk-coins (list 100 50 20 10 5 2 1 0.5))
```

We could then call cc as follows:

```scheme
(cc 100 us-coins)
292
```

To do this will require changing the program cc somewhat. It will still have the same form, but it will access its second argument differently, as follows:


```scheme
(define (cc amount coin-values)
    (cond ((= amount 0) 1)
        ((or (< amount 0) (no-more? coin-values)) 0)
        (else
        (+ (cc amount
                (except-first-denomination
                coin-values))
            (cc (- amount
                (first-denomination
                coin-values)) 
            coin-values)))))
```

Define the procedures first-denomination, except-first-denomination, and no-more? in terms of primitive operations on list structures. Does the order of the list coin-values affect the answer produced by cc? Why or why not?